Hello, I'm Allan Schaffe,
the graphics and media
technology evangelist at Apple.
This presentation is Part 2 of
Mastering OpenGL ES for iPhone.
In Part 1, focused on the environment
around OpenGL ES,
covering versions, the display system,
the rendering loop,
and the processor architecture.
And Part 2 goes deep into
mastering OpenGL ES itself.
I explain the architecture and the
capabilities of the graphics processors,
and then dive deep into specific
performance recommendations for
optimizing texture and geometry.
So, welcome back.
Let's continue.
So I begin this presentation with
a deep look into the capabilities
of the graphics processors and the
specific differences between the
PowerVR MBX Lite and the PowerVR SGX.
And as I do this, you should keep in mind
this chart from Part 1,
outlining the platforms where
each of those GPUs are supported.
The PowerVR SGX is used in the iPhone
3GS and the third generation iPod touch,
and the PowerVR MBX Lite is
used in the iPhone,
the iPhone 3G, and the first and second
generation iPod touch.
So, let's start with the
details of the MBX Lite.
Now, as I said in Part 1,
the MBX Lite supports the fixed function
rendering pipeline of OpenGL ES 1.1.
And its architecture is what's known
as a tile-based deferred renderer.
And I'll describe this in just a moment.
Now, the same devices that support
the MBX Lite are also very
sensitive to memory bandwidth.
And you'll notice that a lot of the
optimization strategies that I talk
about later in the presentation have
to do with reducing the pressure on
memory bandwidth for this reason.
There's a number of implementation
limits on the MBX Lite,
but one that deserves special
mention is the 24 megabyte limit
on textures and render buffers.
This isn't an on-board limit per se,
but rather is reflecting the
fact that the MBX Lite can
only address a contiguous 24
megabytes region in system RAM.
So we always load the textures
and surfaces into that region.
And again, here's another reminder
about the platforms.
Now, in addition to supporting the core
functionality of OpenGL ES 1.1,
the MBX Lite also supports
a number of extensions,
and I've listed them here.
And you can see there's
a number of multi-vendor
extensions with the prefix EXT.
There's a few extensions from
Imagination Technologies,
those are the ones with the IMG prefix,
and a large number of standard
extensions with the OES prefix.
Here I've highlighted a few
particular extensions of interest.
The extension for PVRTC,
texture compression,
is very important and a great way
to reduce memory bandwidth usage,
since the texture actually
remains compressed even after
it's loaded into system memory.
I'll talk a lot more about PVRTC when
we get to the texture section.
BGRA 8888 happens to be a native
32-bit texture format for the device.
This avoids a byte swizzle,
so it's a bit faster to load.
And framebuffer objects.
As I mentioned in Part 1,
framebuffer objects are
absolutely fundamental to how we
do all rendering on the iPhone.
All of your rendering gets
directed to the color render buffer
attachment of a framebuffer object,
and this is picked up by
your CA Eagle layer and the
rest of the display system.
Or you can have a texture attachment
to your framebuffer object and
perform a render to texture,
and then use that texture in another pass
that's bound to the color render buffer.
But in any case,
anytime you're using these
extensions or the ones coming
up in the next few slides,
you should code defensively and
always query for the presence of the
extension and provide some fallback or
error case in case it's not present.
Next, here are some of the standard
implementation limits for the MBX Lite.
The maximum texture size is 1K by 1K,
and as I'd mentioned,
there's a 24MB limit for
textures and surfaces.
On the MBX,
your texture dimensions must be a
power of 2 for both width and height,
and you have two texture units
available for multi-texturing.
Then,
getting into the more detailed limits,
your point size can be
from 1 to 64 pixels,
your line width can be up to 64 pixels,
and your maximum LOD bias.
This is if you're generating texture
mipmaps and want to artificially
bias which mipmap level is chosen,
your maximum bias value is 2.
And the matrix palette extension
supports up to 9 palette
indices and 3 vertex units.
And finally, there's one user clip plane.
So, that's the MBX Lite,
the general capabilities,
the extensions available,
and the limits that are enforced.
Now,
let's contrast that with the PowerVR SGX.
So the SGX is also a
tile-based deferred renderer.
And as I said in Part 1,
it supports both the fixed
function pipeline of OpenGL ES 1.1
and the programmable shading
pipeline of OpenGL ES 2.0.
The 2.0 pipeline is what's
supported natively by the hardware.
And actually,
we express the 1.1 pipeline in hardware
through some specially written shaders.
Now,
the devices with the PowerVR SGX have
higher memory bandwidth,
so they'll be less sensitive to some
of the memory bandwidth concerns
that I'll be discussing later.
And also,
these devices have no particular
limit on texture and surface memory.
But the next three capabilities
are very important.
First is vertex buffer object
acceleration in hardware.
Now, both the MBX and SGX support
vertex buffer objects.
But on the SGX,
you should see a significant difference.
And there's a significant
performance benefit from using
them due to the hardware support.
There's also hardware support for
stencil with an 8-bit stencil buffer.
And textures on the SGX can
have any arbitrary dimensions
up to the maximum texture size.
They don't have to be a power of two.
And just remember,
the SGX is the graphics processor
used in the iPhone 3GS and the
third-generation iPod Touch.
Now, when your OpenGL ES 1.1
application happens to be
running on a device with ESGX,
a number of new extensions appear.
I've highlighted them here.
There are several new extensions dealing
with blending and the blend equation.
You now have the ability to bind
MIPMAP levels to a framebuffer
object and do a render to
texture directly to a MIPMAP.
There's support for the stencil buffer,
either separate or interleaved
with the depth buffer.
And our extension for limited
non-power-of-two texture dimensions.
So, let me emphasize,
these are new extensions or added
features that your existing OpenGL ES 1.1
application can take advantage of.
Anytime one of your users happens
to be using an iPhone 3GS or
third generation iPod touch.
If your application could take
advantage of non-Power of 2 textures,
for example, they're just there now and
you can just make use of them.
Just make sure that you always query
for the presence of any extensions
you're using and conditionally
handle the case where you're
running on a device with the SGX.
Now here are the implementation
limits you'll see when running an
OpenGL ES 1.1 application on the SGX.
The maximum texture size
is now up to 2K by 2K,
and that 24 megabyte limit for
textures and surfaces is gone.
There's no set limit for
textures and surfaces.
Your texture dimensions can be any
arbitrary value up to the maximum size,
so either non-power of 2 or power of 2.
And now you have eight texture
units available for multi-texturing.
Then again, the more detailed limits.
Your point size can now
go up to 511 pixels.
Your line width is now up to 16 pixels.
Your maximum LOD bias is 4 instead of 2.
And the matrix palette extension
supports up to 11 palette
indices and 4 vertex units.
And you have up to 6 user clip planes.
Okay,
so that's the SGX with an application
that's created an OpenGL ES 1.1 context.
Next, let's take a look at what
happens with a 2.0 context.
First, here's the extensions.
Now, these are, of course,
extensions on top of the
OpenGL ES 2.0 baseline specification.
And there is a tremendous
amount of new functionality
in the core of OpenGL ES 2.0.
Things like programmable shaders or frame
buffer objects are now part of the core.
And this is a list of extensions that
are provided in addition to that.
So most of these we've already seen.
Render to MIP maps,
pack depth and stencil, PVRTC, and so on.
But the one that's new
is standard derivatives.
This is a shader extension.
It provides DXDY and
FWITH functions in your shaders.
And here are the limits that
apply when you're using a 2.0
context and programmable shaders.
As before,
your maximum texture size is 2K by 2K,
and you can sample from a maximum of
eight textures in your fragment shaders.
You can have up to 16 vertex attributes,
eight varyings,
128 uniforms in vertex shaders,
and 64 uniforms in fragment shaders.
And then point size and line width
ranges are the same as before.
Next thing I'd like to do is to
briefly describe the tile-based
deferred renderer architecture.
Both the MBX and SGX have
this architecture,
and it's different than what you
may be accustomed to if you came
to OpenGL ES from the desktop,
where you typically
have a stream renderer.
The basic way a tile-based renderer
works is to spatially divide your
screen into a number of tiles,
and as OpenGL commands arrive,
they'll be distributed to the
appropriate tile on screen.
Each tile will be building up
and buffering a list of commands
to be drawn within itself.
And then when we're done
at the end of the frame,
each tile will perform what amounts
to a hidden surface removal pass
over the commands in its buffer.
And it will only rasterize the
geometry that's actually visible.
So you get a huge benefit.
This architecture just tremendously
reduces the depth complexity in your
scene in a typical 3D rendering.
And reducing the depth
complexity lightens the fragment
processing burden quite a lot,
which would otherwise be
a significant bottleneck.
But of course,
this is a different architecture,
different than what's been
broadly used in desktop hardware.
So many of the desktop assumptions
about what's fast or slow may
have changed in some instances.
In particular,
on a tile-based architecture,
it's relatively expensive
to change your scissoring,
viewport, or dither state mid-frame,
as those can lead to changes in the tile
layout that would have to be managed.
Likewise, binding a different frame
buffer attachment mid-frame,
or calling GL read pixels,
introduces a synchronization
point between the CPU and
the graphics processor,
and this lessens the very deep pipelining
that would be achievable otherwise.
And finally,
calls like GL Text Subimage to subload a
texture or update a portion of a texture.
These can have unintended
consequences in a deferred renderer.
We may actually need to keep a
copy of the texture as it existed
before the change and also make
a second copy with your changes,
since we won't actually start
rasterizing those pixels and
sampling from the textures until
the entire frame has been submitted.
So if you're doing any of these things,
they actually need to be very
carefully scheduled as to where in the
timeline of submitting commands for
a new frame you'll put these calls.
And I'll show you how to
do this in just a moment,
but there's one other topic first.
I just want to make one more point about
the hidden surface removal calculation.
The thing to understand is
that on a per pixel basis,
that calculation is only effective for as
long as we're drawing something opaque.
As soon as we draw a non-opaque object,
an alpha blended object,
that invalidates the pixel and everything
that follows for that pixel isn't going
to be able to take advantage of the
hidden surface removal calculations.
So that means you should draw
all of your opaque objects first
so that all of them can take
advantage of HIN surface removal.
And you should draw all your
alpha blended objects last,
sorting those from back to front.
Now,
there's actually one other category to
draw in between these other two groups,
and that's any geometry that's
drawn along with a shader that's
using the discard command to throw
away fragments conditionally.
So when it does come time in your
frame for submitting geometry,
you should draw all your
opaque objects first.
Sorted by state, of course.
And then any objects using discard,
also sorted by state.
And finally, any alpha blended objects
sorted back to front.
And this can sound
counterintuitive to beginners.
You would think that if you were, say,
drawing a bunch of cars,
you'd prefer to draw
all of the first car,
and then all the next car,
all the third car, and so on.
But that's not optimal.
Once you've calculated which
cars are actually on screen,
what's optimal is to draw all the opaque
parts of all the visible cars first,
sorted by state.
So the wheels of all the cars,
the bodies of all the cars, and so on.
And then to draw all the
alpha blended parts last,
sorted back to front.
So the windows of the car that's
furthest away from the eye point,
and the windows of the next closest car,
and the next closest, and so on.
So in terms of the frame
architecture that we'd suggest,
it would look something like this.
Imagine if you were doing all
the things I just mentioned,
the good ones and the
ones to be careful about.
This will show you where in the sequence
of commands you should put those calls.
If you're calling GL text subimage
to update a subregion of a texture,
then the best place to call that
would be before you've submitted any
commands actually using that texture.
This allows us to avoid making
a copy since you actually
haven't used that texture yet.
If you're binding a framebuffer object,
then this is a sync point,
and you generally want to put any
sync points at the very beginning
or very end of your frame,
since those are natural
sync points anyways,
and it will minimize any impact
on the command pipelining.
You can then draw all your
objects as I've just explained,
opaque first, then discard,
then alpha blended last.
And at that point,
you'll have presumably made the
last drawing command in this frame.
So now we're at the
very end of the frame,
and only then it might be okay to
issue a command like GL read pixels,
since this will introduce a sync
point and cause all the tiles to
execute their command buffers.
But so would have present render buffers,
so in this case, it's okay.
Now, one more platform to mention
is the iPhone Simulator.
In terms of its feature set,
it's very similar to an iPhone 3GS.
It supports both OpenGL ES 1.1
and 2.0-based applications.
But it's also very different
because it's running on your Mac.
It does not have a tile-based
deferred renderer architecture.
It does not enforce the memory
limitations you find on an actual device.
It does not actually try to
achieve pixel-for-pixel parity
with what you see on the device.
And obviously,
it doesn't fit in your pocket.
But it's really a great
tool for debugging,
and not just in the obvious
way that you might expect.
Rather, it's wonderful for comparative
debugging and trying to isolate
the source of a problem.
So imagine you have a texture that's
always showing up white on the device
when it should contain an image.
Well, you can try your app in the
simulator and compare the results.
If that texture still shows
up white in the simulator,
then you know that the problem is
probably in your code and related to
the way that you're using OpenGL ES.
But if the result is different,
even this is interesting.
It's not a case where you should
jump to conclusions and assume
you found a bug in OpenGL.
Instead,
this can be frequently a telltale
sign that you've tried to set a mode
that isn't supported or exceeded
a limit of the implementation
for that specific device.
So using the simulator for these
sorts of clues can really help you.
We all make these kinds of mistakes,
but the simulator can be
really helpful in finding them.
Now,
in terms of the specific capabilities,
the simulator supports the complete
OpenGL ES 1.1 implementation.
And as for the extensions,
the only ones not supported that
was on the list for SGX is the
Pack Depth Stencil extension.
And then likewise,
it also provides a full implementation
of the OpenGL ES 2.0 pipeline,
but emits two of the
extensions we saw on the SGX,
packed up stencil again
and standard derivatives.
So to summarize, again,
to master OpenGL ES,
you really need to code
your app defensively.
Rather than reading the device name
and making assumptions based on that,
you should check the list of extensions
directly for any that you need to use.
And query the limits of the device
that you happen to be running on.
And then have code in your app that takes
advantage of the expanded capabilities of
the SGX when it finds them and provides
a fallback when it doesn't for the MBX.
Now, we're going to change gears and go
very deep into optimizing texture.
And there's six topics to cover.
The recommended formats,
the details about
non-power-of-two textures,
and I'll talk about compression, atlases,
mipmaps,
and then have a number of specific best
practices that you'll need to adopt.
So, I'll start with texture formats,
and this is pretty simple.
There's a variety of texture formats
supported across both the MBX and SGX,
and they're listed here on the right.
There's a few 32-bit formats,
several 16-bit formats,
a couple 8-bit formats,
and then the compressed
formats for PBRTC.
Now, I should clarify that when
we're discussing formats,
we're talking about the actual formatting
of the image in system memory and
not image file formats like TIFF,
JPEG, or PNG.
All those file formats end up
with the image itself just being
expanded in memory out to its
full native depth and resolution.
We really recommend
using PVRTC if you can.
So again, particularly systems with the
MBX Lite are more sensitive
to memory bandwidth pressure,
and PVRTC is the only format
that's able to remain compressed
even when it's in memory.
The graphics processor is able to decode
it directly from its compressed format.
And I'll cover this a lot
more in just a moment.
Then all the way on the flip side,
as I'd mentioned earlier,
BGRA 8888 is the native
format for the device,
enabling you to avoid a particular
swizzle as we set up that texture.
But really, all these formats are native,
with the exception of RGB 8888.
That format, you might just think it
could have a 24-bit packing,
but really it just gets padded out to
32 bits per pixel by the implementation.
Now, remember in the previous section,
I'd said that the MBX only
supports textures whose
dimensions are a power of two,
and the SGX supports both power of two
and non-power of two size textures.
So, there's several important things
to know about both of these.
Power of two textures have
some additional flexibility.
They're able to support MIMMAP generation
and sample from the MIMMAP stack
as they're being rasterized,
and they're more flexible in
terms of their ramp modes.
They support repeat as
well as clamp to edge.
But, of course,
the dimensions are fixed to
values that are a power of two.
So, these are sizes like 512 by
512 or 64 by 128 and so on.
And none of these sizes are
perfectly matched to the size
of the screen on the iPhone.
So, there's always either
going to be some scaling,
or if you size the textures to
maintain a one-to-one mapping
of textiles with pixels,
then there will always be some region
of the texture that's not being used.
By contrast, non-power of two textures,
of course, remove this restriction
on their dimensions.
So, they can be perfectly sized for the
screen dimensions at 480 by 320.
And there's a number
of advantages to that.
Particularly for cases where
you want to render to texture,
or you just want some source
imagery that maintains a one-to-one
textile to pixel mapping without
the unused region you'd get with,
say, 512 by 512.
But just bear in mind that
non-power of two textures
aren't necessarily as versatile.
They don't support MIMAPs and
they only support clamp to edge.
The third topic is
compression with PVRTC.
So this is the ability
to take a source image,
say a 32-bit ping image
of a particular size,
and perform a lossy compression
that reduces it to either
2 or 4 bits per pixel.
And that's a huge savings,
either 8 to 1 or 16 to 1.
And the GPU is able to directly
sample from the compressed
representation in memory,
which means that far fewer bytes
are being pushed around in a given
frame to draw with a PVRTC texture.
Now there are some requirements.
In our implementation,
the dimensions of the
texture must be square,
the size must be a power of two,
and the height and width of the base
level must be at least eight pixels.
We provide a compression tool with
the iPhone SDK that will take any of
the variety of desktop image formats
supported by Image.io on your Mac and
compress them into PVRTC images.
And here's the path again.
On your Mac, it's developer platforms,
iPhoneOS.platform/developer-user-bin-te
xture-tool.
Now, here's a comparison between an
original image and some versions
that were compressed with PVRTC.
So, on the left is the original
uncompressed image.
This was a 32-bit ping
that was 256 by 256.
So, that one takes up 256K of RAM.
Then in the middle is the
same image compressed to
PVRTC with 4 bits per pixel,
which totals to 32K of RAM.
And on the right is
PVRTC with 2 bits per pixel,
that's 16K.
And the quality is really pretty good.
If we blow up the images
and really compare them,
here's the original,
then here's the PVRTC at
4 bits per pixel,
and that's really a close comparison.
And I find that the 4-bit PVRTC is
great for this kind of image.
And here's the PVRTC with
two bits per pixel.
So this entire image fits in 16K of RAM,
but I see some artifacts when we
get down to two bits per pixel.
But depending on the usage,
even this might be okay for you.
So now a bit of guidance for when
PVRTC will be most appropriate.
It's really well suited for
images from our analog world,
things like wood and gravel,
smoke or skin.
But it's not really made for images
that come from the digital world,
images with really
high contrast line art,
for example,
or fonts and symbols and so on.
And one last thought to leave you
with about PVRTC is instead of doing a
direct comparison between an original
32-bit image and its PVRTC equivalent,
consider doing a comparison
between images that fit
into a fixed memory budget.
A lot of the time,
the decision you're making is
really going to be between a
16-bit version of the original
texture and a 4-bit PVRTC version.
So at the sizes that I'm showing here,
both of these would require
the same amount of RAM,
128K in this case.
But quite frequently,
the PVRTC image will
actually look better.
All right,
our next topic for texture optimization
is the concept of texture atlases.
And what these are intended to
solve is the very common mistake
of defining a whole bunch of
really small individual textures.
And then when you go to draw them,
you end up doing something like this.
You bind the first little
texture and draw the shark.
Then bind the second little
texture and draw the character.
And bind the third
texture and draw the moon,
and so on.
And this is really inefficient
because of all these state changes.
every texture bind you do is going
to chip away at your performance.
So instead,
you take all these little textures
and combine them together into a
big texture mosaic or texture atlas.
The concept is really simple but
very important because now you can
just bind that big texture once.
And by setting your texture
coordinates correctly,
draw the shark, draw the character,
and draw the moon without
ever changing textures.
And over the course of a whole frame,
this can be a big savings.
Now even better,
to combine this with something I'll be
talking about in the geometry section,
is to use texture atlases in combination
with combined geometry arrays.
So now to draw all
three of these objects,
we just bind the texture once
and we submit a single combined
array with all the geometry.
And this is orders of magnitude more
efficient than that first example
where we were binding each texture
and then just drawing one little quad.
So, we highly recommend
using texture atlases.
And here's a few things to keep in mind.
You'll have to modify the texture
coordinates on your geometry.
And I hope this is obvious.
For example,
on the shark image on the left,
in terms of S and T,
its T coordinates run from 0 to 1.
But in the atlas shown on the right,
it only takes up the top
half of that larger image.
So, its T coordinates run from 0.5 to 1.
Also, you need at least a pixel of
padding between the elements so
that any sampling just off the edge
of one part doesn't pick up any
colors from a neighboring region.
You can't use the repeat wrap mode.
You have to use clamp.
And that's also so you don't sample off
the edge of one region into a neighbor.
And since they tend to be larger images,
texture atlases are really
best suited for static texture.
Here's an example of some
texture atlases from the game
Pocket God from Bolt Interactive.
These are some really great examples.
They're both 1K by 1K.
The image on the left has
more than 300 elements in it,
and the one on the right has over 175.
So just think about this.
What they're able to do is first bind
the left-hand image and draw all the
objects in their scene that are using
any of the textures in this atlas.
In one draw call, perhaps.
And then bind the right-hand image and
draw all the objects in their scene
that are using any of those elements.
Again, in one or just a few draw calls.
So using this technique can really
reduce both the number of state
changes and the number of draw
calls you make in a given frame.
And both of those things can
really improve your performance.
Next topic is mipmaps.
So this is just the concept of
taking an original large texture,
call that your base level texture,
and then creating a series
of successively smaller
and smaller copies of it.
The first copy, half the size in each
dimension of the original.
The next copy, half the size in each
dimension of that first one.
The next one, half of that, and so on.
All the way down to where you
end up with a texture that's
just one pixel by one pixel.
And then when it's time to draw,
the graphics processor will choose
which of those copies most closely
matches essentially the size that
your texture is being scaled to
when it's presented on screen.
And it'll sample the actual
textiles from whichever level
or whichever copy it chooses.
So this is very useful and we recommend
generating and using mipmaps anytime
you're presenting textures in a 3D scene.
The only time you shouldn't
bother with this is if you're only
presenting unscaled images in 2D.
The benefits are that using mipmaps
improves image quality in your scene.
And actually,
since you're potentially sampling
fewer actual texels when you're
using one of the smaller levels,
it can help you with memory bandwidth.
And that's potentially a nice win,
especially on the MBX.
There's two filtering modes,
either linear mipmap linear
or linear mipmap nearest.
And these have either a quality
or performance tradeoff.
And of course,
there's the tradeoff of those extra
smaller copies of your original texture.
If you sum up the sizes of the copies,
it comes out to an additional
one-third memory usage compared to
just having the original base texture.
Now, just a couple more tips before
we wrap up this section.
First is a special note
about GL Text Parameter.
Starting in iPhone OS 3.1 and only
on devices with the PowerVR SGX,
there's a benefit to putting any
calls you make to GL Text Parameter
before the call to GL Text Image 2D.
So, you use GL Text Parameter to
configure texture filter settings,
and of course,
you use GL Text Image 2D to
load the texture.
But if you put the
GL Text Parameter calls first,
that will effectively act as a hint to
the implementation for how to lay out
the texture that's about to be loaded.
And this will briefly
improve its memory usage,
avoiding a copy,
and improve its load time.
A second tip, this one about UI image.
So UI image is what many
OpenGL based applications are
using to load their images.
You load an image from the file system,
you get the CG image from it,
you render that into a CG bitmap context,
and now you finally have
the pixels that you can hand
directly off to GL Text Image 2D.
A second tip, this one about UI image.
So UI image is what many
OpenGL based applications are
using to load their images.
You load that into a CG bitmap context,
and now you finally have
the pixels that you can hand
directly off to GL Text Image 2D.
So we've said a lot about texture.
And to summarize,
we really recommend using PVRTC if your
content is suited for lossy compression.
Otherwise,
consider using one of the 16-bit color
formats like RGBA 5551 or RGB 565.
We recommend generating mipmaps.
We recommend using texture atlases.
And when you're running
on the SGX hardware,
note that non-PowerF2 textures are
supported even in an OpenGL ES 1.1 app.
Then those tips.
Set up your texture parameters
before you load the texture
and use the UI image image with
contents of file factory method.
But actually, we're not done yet.
As I mentioned in the
architecture section,
doing any texture sub-loads in the
middle of a frame can be expensive.
So if you're doing this,
we recommend putting those calls at the
start of the frame before you've used
the texture that you're about to modify.
On the MBX hardware,
it's imperative that you stay
below the 24 megabyte limit
for textures and surfaces.
And then there's two things
I hadn't covered yet.
The first is to pre-load and
warm all of your textures.
So the work done by the driver
to actually prepare a texture
for rendering is deferred until
the first time you actually go to
draw something with that texture.
And sometimes this lazy loading is okay,
but many applications are really
trying hard to maintain a steady frame
rate and would rather take that hit
up front rather than at some arbitrary
time while the render loop is running.
So the practical advice is to
run through all your textures.
And then the next step is to take
the textures in the beginning
of your app and draw something.
It can be just one pixel
and it can be off screen.
It doesn't matter.
But just draw something from each
texture to get them all pre-loaded.
Now, an obvious place you might think
to put that work would be in your
application did finish launching method.
But actually,
that's not a good place since you
want to return from that as quickly as
possible during application startup.
So you'll have to get clever.
And this is something that apps will have
to figure out on a case-by-case basis.
So you'll have to get clever.
And this is something that apps will have
to figure out on a case-by-case basis.
So you'll have to get clever.
And this is something that apps will have
to figure out on a case-by-case basis.
If after your app starts up,
you're sitting on the menu screen,
for instance, and waiting for the user
to start their game,
then that's an ideal time
to be warming your textures.
And if you don't get through them all,
well, that's okay.
Every little bit will help.
And finally, the last bit of advice for
texturing is to remember that the
call to GLTECHIMAGE2D will make
its own copy of your image data.
So you should free your copy of that
image data immediately afterwards.
All right, wow,
so that was a lot to absorb.
But now we're going to go even
deeper into optimizing geometry.
And there's seven topics to cover.
First, the fundamental data structures,
vertex arrays, triangle strips,
indexed arrays, and VBOs.
Then, the optimizations on those
structures through interleaving,
smaller data types, and proper alignment.
The starting point is to
talk about vertex arrays.
These are the method for
defining geometry with OpenGL ES,
and they form the foundation of indexed
arrays and vertex buffer objects.
But I'm not going to teach the basics
of how to create a vertex array.
I bring them up simply
to give you a reminder.
They're called arrays for
a very important reason.
And it's to encourage you to
fill them with a lot of data,
to enable the implementation to do a bulk
data transfer into the graphics pipeline.
And I see a lot of applications that
are creating really short vertex arrays,
sometimes just one or two
triangles in an array,
and submitting one or two triangles
at a time to the graphics pipeline.
If you're doing this,
you're dropping orders of magnitude
of performance on the floor.
So developers who have really
mastered OpenGL ES become very
focused on maximizing the length,
of their vertex arrays and
managing state very carefully,
to allow them to pack yet
more data into those arrays.
All with the goal of having
just a few very long arrays,
rather than a lot of shorter ones.
Now, depending on your dataset,
one optimization you might be
able to apply to your vertex
arrays is to batch up individual
triangles into triangle strips.
This is a method of reducing
the number of vertices that need
to be submitted to the graphics
processor without any change to the
number of triangles being rendered.
So, here in this diagram,
we see that the vertices on the
inside edges of these coincident
triangles are really just
duplicates and can be removed.
and all three of these triangles
batched up into a single strip.
And the reason why this is so helpful
is because it is again a way of reducing
the number of bytes that you need to
be pushing around to render a frame.
And here you see that just
in these three triangles,
we go from nine vertices down to five.
And if each vertex is defined
to be 48 bytes in size following
this formula on the bottom,
then this takes us from
432 bytes down to 240.
Now, something that comes up once you
start creating triangle strips
is that each strip requires
its own call to GLDrawArrays.
And yet we really want to reduce
the number of calls to draw arrays
and basically get all our drawing
done from a big long array.
Well,
there's a technique that can help you
with this called degenerate triangles.
And the idea is that we'll
actually add vertices,
a copy of the last vertex of the
first array and a copy of the
first vertex of the next array.
And that will join these two separate
strips together into one without changing
what's actually rendered on screen.
And it's because these
degenerate triangles we've
created won't be rasterized.
The reason is this, the vertices ABC,
BCD and CDE each define a valid triangle.
But DEE, that's a line,
it's not a triangle.
So it won't be drawn if our array
is defined to consist of triangles.
Likewise, EEF, EFF, FFG,
all those are just more
lines and won't be drawn.
But then FGH,
GHI and HIJ are valid triangles
again and will be rendered normally.
So this actually causes a net
increase in the number of vertices
and the number of bytes in the array,
but it eliminates a call to GLDrawArrays,
which is a big deal.
Then the third topic is indexed arrays.
And again, this will be very dependent
on your actual data set.
But if you have data that
ultimately defines a mesh,
then the inner vertices within that
mesh will generally be shared among
a large number of triangles each.
So in this example,
the vertices in the middle each
touch six different triangles.
Now, if I were to define this
mesh as a triangle strip,
I'd have a partial strip
containing the blue triangle,
the blue triangle, and the blue triangle.
Then some degenerate vertices,
and then another partial strip
with the purple triangles.
But all the shared vertices in the
middle would have to be duplicated
in both of the partial strips.
So instead, if we create just one array
containing all the vertices here,
with each vertex only
listed once in that array,
and then a separate index array that
defines the triangles or triangle strips,
then over a large mesh,
I can have a huge net savings.
Here, I'm drawing a total of 16 triangles
and only using 742 bytes to do it.
And you remember on the previous
slide with the degenerate triangles,
that was only six triangles,
and it took 576 bytes.
And finally,
the ultimate optimization generally
comes from using vertex buffer objects.
And as I mentioned in
the devices section,
these are a huge win on
SGX because they're directly
supported by the hardware.
Now, on the MBX,
we basically just treat VBOs as
an indexed array since there isn't
any special hardware for them.
So you don't see the same performance
differential just from using
them like you should on the SGX.
But they don't hurt at all.
So it's still considered a
highly recommended practice.
And bear in mind,
even if you're tuning for the MBX,
if your user just happens to have an SGX,
they'll be able to take
advantage of VBO hardware
automatically from the same binary.
Now, the way VBOs work is to essentially
take the vertex array API and
add an object model to it.
So, rather than you just providing
OpenGL with a pointer to an array
that you might be changing any time,
you give OpenGL that array and then let
it act as the gatekeeper for any changes.
So, let's contrast VBOs with
vertex or indexed arrays.
Any time you just use a vertex
array or an indexed array,
all the data in that array will be
copied to the GPU every single frame.
So, that's right.
So, if you're not using VBOs,
a copy of your vertex data will
be made every frame and then
discarded once it's been rendered.
So, this is how all rendering
happens on the MBX,
and it's true for any
non-VBO rendering on the SGX.
And if you had wondered what copy index
data was all about in instruments,
for example, this is it.
Now, there is a silver
lining to that approach.
It means that making changes
to your vertex array really
can happen without any penalty,
since the implementation is just going
to make its own copy of it anyways.
But now, instead,
if you use vertex buffer objects,
then on the SGX,
this data gets copied once and
then reused in subsequent frames.
This has a great effect on performance.
The data is faster to access,
and it's faster for you to draw a frame.
But the question becomes,
how about making changes?
Well, you do this by calling map buffer.
And as I said,
OpenGL acts as the gatekeeper
for data once you define VBOs.
But actually,
since we have a unified memory
architecture on the iPhone,
there's really no extra
overhead of a map buffer call.
It's just giving you a pointer to
the wired system memory that's being
directly referenced by the GPU.
So, we really,
really recommend that you define your
vertex data with a vertex buffer object.
Now, changing gears from vertex
optimization to the organization
of the arrays themselves.
It's very typical for a 3D object to
be defined by an array of vertices
and a separate array of normals,
another separate array
of texture coordinates,
and so on.
This tends to be how you find
data organized in some of
the popular 3D file formats.
It's also an easy way to
print and understand sample
code in a book and so on.
So it's just a routine practice
that's seen quite a lot.
But actually, it's not the most optimal
way of submitting that data
to the graphics processor.
And the reason is because to load the
attributes for one vertex requires
fetches from all these separate arrays,
which probably don't have
good locality and probably
aren't all in cache and so on.
What's better is if you can
interleave each vertex attribute
and construct a single array.
So now when we go to fetch
the data for a 3D object,
and we go to fetch the data
for a particular vertex,
there's excellent locality and
the array is likely to wind up
in cache as we walk through it.
And this has nice benefits
for both the MBX and SGX.
Now, on the MBX,
there's even an optimal order
for the interleaved attributes.
And it's vertices, then normals,
then colors, then texture coordinates.
On the SGX, the order doesn't matter.
Now, an exception for interleaving
your vertex array is if you have
a lot of dynamic attributes.
Meaning you plan to run through one
of the attribute lists every frame,
let's say the texture coordinates,
and update all of them.
Well, this can be a lot of work since
you have to move along the
array with a particular stride.
So in that case,
we recommend that you separate
out any dynamic attributes.
Leave all the other
attributes interleaved,
but take the ones that you plan
to update out of the interleaving,
or any that you might share
among multiple objects.
And then really getting
now into some specifics.
You remember in my example
that I had defined a single
vertex as being 48 bytes.
And that was because I used
floats for all my attributes.
Well, you should actually try to use
smaller data types if you can,
like shorts for the vertices
and normals and perhaps just
bytes to define the colors.
It's common for colors to be
defined from 0 to 255 per component,
for example.
And since texture coordinates
are frequently just 0 to 255,
you can use them to define the colors.
from 0 to 1,
you can sometimes quantize them
into bytes or at least use shorts.
So, here's a couple of examples.
At first,
I started out with 48 bytes per vertex
with every attribute defined as a float,
which are four bytes each.
And then, in the middle example,
I've reduced my color
attributes to bytes,
and my texture coordinates to shorts,
and this cuts a single
vertex down to 32 bytes,
or two thirds the size of the original,
and that's great.
Now, I'll go even further using shorts
for the vertices and normals,
bytes for the colors,
and shorts for the texture coordinates.
This takes me down to
20 bytes per vertex,
which would be fantastic,
but there's a problem with
it that actually would ruin
everything if we left it this way.
And the attributes in
that case are misaligned.
So here I'll just stack those
vertices into an interleaved
array to show the problem.
The issue is that each attribute
group must start at a 4-byte boundary.
And you can see that the normals don't
start at a 4-byte boundary in this case.
They're starting at byte 6,
and that throws everything
off for the rest of the array.
So, if you were to do this,
we actually have to correct it for you.
The implementation will
fall off the fast path,
make a copy of your array,
and pad it to fix your alignment problem.
And remember, this will have to happen
every single frame.
So, don't leave this to the
implementation to fix.
Just when you choose the
size of your attributes,
make sure each attribute group will
always start on a 4-byte boundary.
And this is nothing complicated.
Instead of the vertices being defined as,
say, short vertex sub 3,
I'm saying to make it short vertex sub
4 and leave the fourth element unused.
To basically add the padding that the
driver would have had to do for you.
And so, with this fixed,
our size per vertex
gets down to 24 bytes,
which is half the original size.
Half as many bytes to copy each frame
for a vertex array or index array.
And half as much memory bandwidth
being used to submit this
geometry to the graphics pipeline.
So, it's a huge win.
So let's summarize what
we've covered for geometry.
Long vertex arrays are
the starting point,
and you should strive to create
just a few very long arrays
rather than a lot of short arrays.
Use vertex buffer objects.
Even if your current
test platform is the MBX,
where you won't see the benefit,
your users who happen to have
a device with the SGX will.
Interleave your vertex data,
but separate out any dynamic
data from the interleave list.
Use smaller types if you can,
and you almost always can for
colors and texture coordinates.
And if you do use smaller types,
make sure that the alignment is perfect.
Ensure that each attribute group
starts on a 4-byte boundary.
All right,
so that brings us to the end of Part 2.
We've covered a lot of ground.
And I hope this series has been
helpful for you in giving you a lot
of platform-specific information
that you can put into use right away.
In the meantime,
here's my contact information
if you have questions about
the content presented here,
and a link to the iPhone
Dev Center for documentation,
sample code, and our developer forums.
Thank you for watching.